57. A Brief History of Working Women 493
society was traditionally matrilineal, with extended mobility, and high instability. They are kept there
families the norm, Navajo women owned property because of the “stagnation of the reservation econ-
and played an important role in family decisions. omy,” discrimination, and theit relatively low level
But beginning in the 1930s, government policy dis- of educational attainment. A significant number do
rupted this system by giving land only to males. not have a high school diploma (in 1990, more than
As they could no longet make a sufficient living off one-third of all those over the age of 25, compared to
the land, more and more Navajo men had to seek one-fifth of white women).
employment off the reservations. Nuclear families
pecame the norm. Navajo women became depen- LATINA [cHICANA] WOMEN
dent on male providers. With the men away much ...- Large numbers of Chicanas migrated, usually
of the time, these women are often isolated and with husband and children, from Mexico to the
powerless. They often face divorce or desertion and United States during the 1916-1920 labor short-
thus economic difficulties, because the community age created by World War I. They found work in the
frowns on women seeking work off the reservation. sprawling “factory farms” of the Southwest, har-
such disruption of the traditional Native American vesting fruits, vegetables, and cotton in the Impe-
society left Native American women in very grim rial and San Joaquin valleys of California, the Salt
economic circumstances. But in recent decades, more River valley of Arizona, and the Rio Grande valley
and more of them have gotten jobs. Native American of Texas. They also went to the Midwest, for instance
women’s labor-force participation rate in 1970 was 35 to Michigan and Minnesota, to harvest sugar beets.
percent (compared to 43% for all women). This rate Such migrant workers typically were exploited,
rose sharply to 55 percent by the early 1990s and is spending long, tedious, and physically demanding
now within a few percentage points of the rate for all hours in the fields for very low pay: Some became
women. tenant farmers, which might seem 4 step up, except
Like their African American counterparts over too often this system “created debt peonage unable
the past half century, Native American women have to pay the rent, tenants were unable to leave the land
gradually moved out of low-skill farm and nonfarm and remained virtually permanently indebted to
work and domestic jobs into clerical, sales, profes- their landlords.”
sional, technical, and other “white-collar” jobs. In During the 1920s, with a shortage of European
1960, one in six working Native American women immigration, new job opportunities opened up for
was employed as a domestic household worker; by Mexican Americans, and they began to migrate from
the early 1990s only one in a hundred was. During rural, farm country to the urban, industrial centers,
the same period, the proportion of Native American where they found work as domestics and factory
women involved in agricultural work also went from workers. By 1930, one-third of working Chicanas
[one in] ten to one in a hundred. Manufacturing work were domestics and a quarter worked in manufactur-
was increasingly replaced by white-collar work, re- ing; at the time, the share employed in agriculture,
flecting the overall trends in the occupational struc forestry, and mining had fallen to 21 percent. Wage
: ture; more specifically, while the percentage involved scales varied according to ethnicity, however. It was
in factory work (much of it in textiles and traditional not uncommon to pay Chicana workers lower wages
crafts) fell from 18.1 to 14.2, the percentage doing than “Anglo” (whites of European descent) women
white-collar work soared from 28.9 to 61.3. Although for doing the same job, whether as domestics, laun-
many of these white-collar jobs are classified as dresses, or workers in the food-processing industries
“professional” (15.7% of all working Native Ameri- of the West and Southwest. Then the Depression
can women) OF “managerial” (9.4%), two-thirds of years of the 1930s, with the general shortage of jobs,
Native American women are still concentrated in brought a backlash against Mexican American labor,
the “secondary” sector of the labor market—which is and thousands of Mexicans were deported or pres-
characterized by low wages: few or no benefits, low _ sured to leave.
———————— = =—